welcome to topcast and to question
number 10 in my series of questions for
david and today it's one about dark
energy which is a topic dear to my heart
because as many will know i spent most
of my formal training so to speak
in studying astronomy and dark energy is
one of those big open questions maybe
the biggest that we know of at the
moment i'm old enough to remember
sitting in astronomy lectures at the
university of new south wales learning
about the big bang learning about
cosmology learning about the
mathematical ways in which we could
predict what's going to happen next as
the universe evolves and what i remember
learning is about the big bang of course
and then about how after the big bang
because the universe cooled we should
expect the expansion of the universe to
slow and if the expansion of the
universe slows there are one of three
things could have held one is that the
universe just continues to expand
off forever but just asymptotically
getting slower and slower and slower
getting ever closer to becoming zero
expansion so it sort of just expands
expands expands forever at an ever
decreasing rate that was one possibility
i was told about another possibility was
well the universe could be very finely
balanced finely tuned such that it would
expand just so far and stop and then it
would stop at that particular size that
seemed a bit unusual i don't think
anyone really thought that could be a
possibility the most common possibility
among astronomers at least as far as i'm
aware of at that time this was 96 97
something like that were the astronomers
who were saying well we expect a big
crunch we expect a reversal of the
expansion the universe will expand and
then gets to so big and then fall back
in on itself much like the explanation
for why if you throw a ball up in the
air it comes back down again because
eventually gravity wins over the thrust
of your hand unless you have a source of
energy on that ball like a rocket
propelling it upwards
so that's what we thought we thought
that it had to be one of these things
whatever the case was the expansion of
the universe had to slow down whether it
reversed or not was an open question so
it was such a huge surprise to put it
mildly in 1998 when two teams of
astronomers one of which was saul
perlmutter and one of which was led by
brian schmidt we claim him as an aussie
found that the expansion of the universe
wasn't slowing down and it wasn't going
to stop but instead it is accelerating
its rate of expansion which is a
phenomenal discovery and what they did
of course these two teams independently
of one another was they looked at the
luminosity the brightness of type 1a
supernova type 1a supernova where you
have a white dwarf star accreting
material a white dwarf star has an upper
limit on its mass of 1.38 times the mass
of the sun this is called the
chandrasekhar limit the reason that it
has an upper limit of 1.38 times the
mass of the sun is because any bigger
than that and the gravitational force is
so great as to overcome what's known as
the electron degeneracy pressure so the
repulsion of electrons against electrons
in the atoms that make up the white
dwarf star that is overcome that force
of repulsion is overcome
by gravity causing the entire white
dwarf star to collapse in on itself into
uh well i guess it's a neutron star is
what it turns into but in the process
it turns into a supernova that process
happens very very quickly and it happens
at precisely this 1.38 times the mass of
the sun so if you have a white dwarf
that is less than 1.38 times the mass of
the sun but his accreting matter is
collecting mata often in a binary system
so if this white dwarf is orbiting a
let's say a red giant star it can be
collecting the material from that red
giant star it gets to the 1.38 threshold
and then it goes bang and all of these
white dwarfs that we see these type 1
supernova they
go bang at precisely that mass and
therefore their luminosity is precisely
the
same amount of energy it's the same
brightness and so they can be used as
what's known as a standard candle if
they've got a standard luminosity
then by looking at how bright they
appear to be here on earth we can figure
out how far away they are given we know
how bright they are
at their place of origin where they
happen to be uh there's very famous
equations in astronomy that are used to
do this distance calculation and so the
thing is that in 1998 when they looked
at the brightness of these particular
stars they found they were too dim they
were much more dim than what they
expected if anything they expected them
to be brighter they expected them to be
brighter because they thought that well
the expansion of the universe might be
slowing down over time but it wasn't it
was in fact increasing over time over
the last seven billion years or so the
expansion of the universe has been
accelerating uh in its rate and so
taking the apparent brightness of these
white dwarves coupled with the redshift
of the light coming from these well not
so much white dwarves from the supernova
from the type 1a supernovas putting
these two things together
led astronomers to the conclusion
therefore the universe is accelerating
in its expansion if that's happening
something is is overcoming the gravity
that should otherwise cause the slowing
down of the expansion and that something
that's overcoming it has been given a
label dark energy which is the name of a
problem not the name of the solution
after all we don't know where this
energy is coming from what's actually
producing the energy and i should say
astronomers did list they did make a
literal list of things that
could have explained why
the supernovae appeared to be more dim
than what they were things like dust
between us and the supernovae things
like supernovae at these vast distances
might have slightly different physical
properties to the ones that are here
they ruled all of these things out and
they were left with well the only
possible explanation that we can think
of
is that space is expanding at an
increasing rate so for now we have to
take that seriously the universe is
expanding at an accelerating rate there
is this dark energy in the universe
driving that expansion but we don't know
what the cause of the dark energy is it
again is the name of a problem not the
name of a solution
so in my conversation with david this
turned out to be my final question for
david i haven't published all my
questions for david by the way
i'm going to leave the publication of
the full conversation which i know
everyone's been waiting for until the
arbitrary episode 100 so episode 100
look forward to that there will be a lot
of additional material there questions
that i haven't published that you'll be
able to hear then during episode 100
which should be out in a few weeks but
this final question i actually left to
my father who is one person who never
takes on faith anything i say it doesn't
matter what qualifications i might have
in the subjects that i'm telling him
about he sometimes doesn't take my
answer seriously so i said to my father
well if you could ask david deutch a
question what would it be and it was
this one it was about dark energy and
today october 27th happens to be his
birthday so happy birthday dad
um this question's for you my last
question is from my father and i'll just
ask you this before i go it's about dark
energy and
we know the universe is accelerating in
its expansion it's behaving
as if there is negative pressure on the
outside of the observable universe
isn't this evidence that the observable
universe is actually inside of a much
larger
region
itself
of lower density but magnificently
greater size perhaps infinite in size
and perhaps it's actually got zero
density perhaps this void beyond our
universe
is the thing into which the universe is
necessarily expanding because we've got
positive pressure inside of our universe
and outside of that outside of our
universe that's negative pressure could
this be a solution
so
first of all dark energy is just the
name given to this anomalous expansion
which we haven't explained yes so i
think the reason that dark energy was
chosen as a name is because of dark
matter
where
the the all reasonable theories of it so
far
have postulated that it's a kind of
matter
and it's dark because because it doesn't
interact with with photons and so on
with dark energy we don't have such a
thing we we don't know that there is a
source of pressure or that these
observations
are caused by something pushing on the
universe and so on but
where's the prevailing theories of what
dark energy does
nevermind what it is but what it does
the universe is not expanding into
anything
the universe is
is uh the length scales in the universe
are increasing intrinsically and this is
the same uh the same as was the case
with the with the prevailing theories
before
uh dark energy that the universe
initially had uh well at any rate very
near to the big bang it was very small
there was a time when it was only the
size of an atom there was a time when it
was only the size of a neutron and so on
and at that time
and now it's much bigger the difference
between then and now is not that it has
expanded to fill a void it has just
expanded intrinsically yes
and some of the present theories say
that it is in fact infinitely large
and
that it is infinite infinitely large and
homogeneous so that the the total amount
of matter in it is infinite uh i don't
think that there are any
theories
i mean one could easily write down a
theory
in which the universe was inhomogeneous
and we are in the only place in it that
has mata right yes that wouldn't help in
any way with any of the existing
theories and more generally by the way
theories of inhomogeneity
in the universe
as far as i know i'm not an expert on
this but i think they've only been
invoked by people who want to say that
there is no dark energy that it's just a
coincidence caused by in homogeneities
excellent okay i think that absolutely
answered the question so there we have
it what i would add to what david's
saying there just by way of explanatory
notes is that
my father could in a technical sense be
correct of course but what david is
saying is that well if you did have this
perfect vacuum of some kind outside of
the observable universe all you'd be
saying really is that the universe being
defined as absolutely everything that
exists would be larger than what we
thought but
in homogeneous in other words it
wouldn't be roughly the same at every
single place which is what the
cosmological principle is the
cosmological principle is this
fundamental idea in astronomy in
cosmology which is that at every single
place in the universe it looks roughly
the same so the density of the universe
the number of stars galaxies mata and so
on is roughly the same there's no reason
to think
any one place like where we are as
privileged or the other side of the
universe is privileged and different or
whatever else which is a very good
working assumption after all if it
wasn't homogenous you'd have some
explaining to do why isn't homogeneous
and indeed when we look out into the
universe we see homogeneity roughly
speaking there are some wrinkles in this
where we have the distribution of
galaxies being on these filaments around
these voids
as if there are bubbles of extremely low
density where there are very few
galaxies at all and then the galaxies
are distributed as if they're on the
surface of these bubbles which is all
very interesting and goes back to
quantum theory but i won't get into that
right now
the point is here is if you postulate
this
in homogeneous universe
to try and explain the observations that
we have of the accelerating apparent
expansion of the universe you've got
even more explaining to do it's like how
did it end up in homogeneous in the
first place what we're observing is the
expansion of space not just the rushing
of galaxies through space which is kind
of what would happen unless of course
you were trying to say that it's the
space itself accelerating into this
other different space so
it raises more questions than it solves
this particular theory we don't have any
explanation so at the moment it's almost
like all explanations are welcome but we
can of course as always we can criticize
different explanations based upon the
best knowledge we have at any particular
time so it was wonderful to have david
weigh in on this question one of the
discussions i have with my father
sometimes one day maybe david can try
and convince my father that we do
live in a multiverse
but it but it's good to have someone who
is willing to push back
against me on many of these ideas and
who is of course a lay person so happy
birthday once again to my father and
happy anniversary to my father and my
mother for tomorrow for their 49th
wedding anniversary next year is of
course the big one and we'll have the
big celebration and once again episode
100 is going to be the complete
conversation with david i'll release
that in full as a celebration
essentially of
top cast's century of episodes but until
the next episode bye
[Music]
oh
you